GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: The raucous primary
campaign tightens, as Donald
Trump reaches out, Jeb Bush goes
on offense, Bernie Sanders
rises, and Hillary Clinton
hands over her private
e-mail server.
JUDY WOODRUFF: China's currency
falls further. Wall Street is
jolted, but recovers for the
day -- what a weakened yuan
means for American pocketbooks
and paychecks.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, changing the
face of classical music,
nurturing talent at an early age
to
train a new generation
of diverse musicians.
NJERI GREVIOUS, Yale University:
When we're engaging with our
instruments, it's just us,
ourselves, our instruments, our
music. And then when we're
playing with other people,
it's all of that times
-- to the nth power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Enormous
explosions tore through a
container port tonight in
Northeastern China.
Officials reported at least 13
dead and up to 400 injured. It
happened in Tianjin at
a warehouse for hazardous
materials, shortly before
midnight, local time. Police
said the
first blast lit off a much
larger one, with the force of 21
tons of TNT. It sent a gigantic
fireball into the air, and the
shockwave sent people flooding
into hospitals.
GWEN IFILL: Former President
Jimmy Carter announced this
afternoon he has cancer. In
a statement, he said recent
surgery showed it's spread from
his liver to other parts
of his body. He said he will
begin treatment in Atlanta.
In a recent interview with the
"NewsHour," the 39th president
noted that both his parents
and all three siblings
died of cancer.
JIMMY CARTER, Former President
of the United States: They all
smoked cigarettes. And I
never have smoked a cigarette.
So, I think that may be a
triggering device to some
genetic
factor. I don't know what the
background is. But the health
service of America kind of
adopted me as a target for -- we
were the only family in the
world for a number of years
that was known to have
pancreatic cancer deaths four --
in four members.
GWEN IFILL: Former President
Carter is 90 years old.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Protesters in
Arlington, Texas, say they will
keep demanding criminal charges
in the police killing of
Christian Taylor. The unarmed
college football player was
killed
Friday night at an auto
dealership. Last night, the
Arlington police chief fired
Officer Brad
Miller, citing -- quote --
"serious concerns" about his
actions.
WILL JOHNSON, Arlington, Texas,
Police Chief: These concerns,
however, are best addressed
through the criminal
investigation process. However,
based on the preponderance of
the
evidence available to me and the
facts revealed by the
investigative team, I have
decided
to terminate Officer Miller's
employment with the Arlington
Police Department for exercising
poor judgment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The chief said
it's clear from security video
that Taylor vandalized vehicles
at the auto lot and drove one
into the building. But he said
that doesn't excuse the
officer's
mistakes.
GWEN IFILL: A new blaze added to
California's wildfire woes
today. This one is burning
across
26 square miles north of San
Francisco. Gusty winds have
spread the flames, and more than
1,100 firefighters are on the
fire lines. But they're not
expected to have it contained
until Monday. At least 150
people had have to leave their
homes, including some who just
recently had to run
from another big fire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's not fire,
but floods in Myanmar, the worst
in decades. Officials say
more than a million people are
critically affected. Nearly
4,000 were evacuated today
from the stricken capital of
Chin State in the Southeast
Asian nation. Mudslides
triggered
by torrential rains have
destroyed hundreds of homes in
low-lying areas since late June.
More than 100 people have died.
GWEN IFILL: Beleaguered
officials in Greece bolstered
security today on a holiday
island
where tensions with migrants are
growing. They're fleeing war in
Syria and elsewhere,
but finding little relief.
Harry Smith of Independent
Television News has this report.
HARRY SMITH: By night and by
day, they're coming ashore now
in the thousands. It's just
a short crossing from Turkey
to the island of Kos.
But the celebrations are
short-lived. The authorities
here are overwhelmed; 2,000 of
the new arrivals have been
locked in a football stadium
without food, water, shade or
sanitation.
They have to be registered
before they can move on. Those
with the strength to do so
push to try to reach the
front of the queue.
MAN: I think it's very bad, very
bad situation there. You see it
as deadly bad. They are
running from the death to the
death. I don't know. We come to
a country respect human rights
and don't know -- they
must respect our rights.
HARRY SMITH: A team of doctors
from Medecins Sans Frontieres
said they have been struggling
to treat the numbers overcome by
the heat, many of them children.
MAN: By putting 2,000 people
inside an area that wasn't
prepared, meaning it had only
two toilets, no access for
water. They now have just the
water -- for all the people,
when -- a situation that
is really dramatic inside.
HARRY SMITH: These pictures said
to have been taken today in the
Damascus suburb of Ghouta
provide a sharp reminder of why
so many are so desperate to
cross the sea to Europe. The
route to Greece has become the
most popular crossing since the
fighting in Libya made
the trip to Italy too dangerous.
But they are now arriving in a
country already struggling with
a crisis of its own. Extra
riot police have been sent to
Kos and the other islands in the
Aegean to help control
the influx. There have also been
calls for more ferries to take
the migrants to the mainland.
But that only moves the
problem somewhere else.
GWEN IFILL: The Greek government
said it's also sending a cruise
liner to Kos, to be
converted into a processing
center for the migrants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Wall Street
rode a roller coaster today, as
China allowed its currency
to fall for a second day. The
Dow Jones industrial average
dropped 277 points before
heading
back up. In the end, the Dow was
just a fraction of a point
lower, closing near 17400. The
Nasdaq rose seven points
and the S&P 500 added two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
politics, policy and polls on
the campaign trail; Hillary
Clinton agrees to hand over her
private e-mail server; how
China's currency could affect
American business and
jobs, plus much more.
GWEN IFILL: The last few days
have brought yet another twist
in the already dramatic
race for president, with a new
New Hampshire poll showing
Democratic Senator Bernie
Sanders
ahead of Hillary Clinton
for the first time.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports on the
changing campaign landscape in
both
political parties.
LISA DESJARDINS: What was a blur
of could-bes and would-bes now
is moving to the beginning
of a defined 2016 horse race,
including a major twist on the
Democrats' side.
When Vermont Senator Bernie
Sanders entered the race, it
seemed unlikely he could shake
the assumption that Hillary
Clinton would be the Democratic
nominee, but this summer
is blowing momentum his way in
the Northeast. Sanders has a
seven-point lead over Clinton
in a New Hampshire poll released
yesterday. He still trails by
wide margins in national
polls.
But Sanders' biggest numbers are
his crowd numbers. He has
attracted eye-popping audiences
like this one, 27,000 people at
a rally in Los Angeles over the
weekend. That's more
than either Democrats or
Republicans have seen. As
Hillary Clinton pushes policy
ideas,
including college tuition cuts,
Sanders' message of income
equality is resonating, here
earning
endorsement of a
national nurses union.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: All of
you will remember when Martin
Luther
King led the March on
Washington. You know what that
march was called? It was called
Jobs and Justice.
LISA DESJARDINS: Meanwhile, on
the GOP side, it's still
anyone's race. In Iowa, Donald
Trump leads, followed by these
three Republicans. But take a
look at the latest New Hampshire
poll, and those faces behind
Trump change completely.
As for Trump:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We're going to have a
little fun tonight.
LISA DESJARDINS: The CEO is now
looking to expand his need,
campaigning in more places
like this event in Michigan last
night. Not that Trump is without
problems. He lost a
top adviser this weekend
following his sharp comments
about FOX News anchor Megyn
Kelly.
As Trump aims to
keep first place:
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: We're facing an ISIS
and its ideology. What it is,
is, to borrow a phrase, the
focus of evil in the modern
world.
LISA DESJARDINS: Jeb Bush, who
was thought to be potential
front-runner before he entered
the race, is hoping to actually
gain the top spot using policy,
foreign policy. He outlined
it in this address at the Reagan
Library last night, blaming
President Obama and Hillary
Clinton for the rise of the
Islamic State in Iraq.
JEB BUSH: Where was Secretary of
State Clinton in all of this?
Like the president himself,
she had opposed the surge, then
joined in claiming credit for
its success, then stood
by as that hard-won victory by
American allied forces was
thrown away.
LISA DESJARDINS: As for Clinton,
this week, she indicated she's
ready for challenges from
both sides.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: I'm
looking forward to debating,
first my
friends and colleagues in the
Democratic side, and then, you
know, finally having a chance
to debate the Republicans about
whatever their nominee has to
say.
LISA DESJARDINS: Of course, all
candidates will have much more
to say in the days and
weeks ahead.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Lisa Desjardins in Washington.
GWEN IFILL: And there was other
news on Hillary Clinton's
campaign today, her surprise
move
to turn her personal e-mail
server over to the Justice
Department. It followed new
details
that some of them contained
classified information.
Secretary Clinton has been
responding to questions about
her e-mail correspondence for
months.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I didn't
e-mail any classified material
to anyone on my e-mail.
There is no classified material.
So I'm certainly well aware of
the classification requirements
and didn't send
classified material.
I am confident that I never sent
nor received any information
that was classified at the
time it was sent and received.
This is really a question for
the State Department. They're
the ones that are bearing the
responsibility to, you know,
sort through these thousands
and thousands of e-mails and
determine at what pace they can
be released. And, you know,
I really hope that it would
be as quickly as possible.
GWEN IFILL: We are joined now by
Anita Kumar, White House
correspondent for McClatchy
Newspapers.
Anita, we just saw the way her
questions have changed -- her
answers have changed ever so
slightly over the summer. What
is the difference between what
she said in the answers to these
questions when they first came
up and what she is saying now?
ANITA KUMAR, White House
Correspondent, McClatchy
Newspapers: I think there is
actually a lot
of similarities.
She said -- she stuck to the
fact that she didn't send or
receive classified information.
Now, her response has changed
because she said she wouldn't
give up the server, she
wouldn't give up the thumb
drives with the e-mails, and
she's clearly changed her mind
about that.
But what she has said still is
that she didn't send or receive
classified information.
GWEN IFILL: The other thing she
said today in a statement that
her campaign put out today
was that she was only one four
secretaries of state who were
asked to turn over these
e-mails who did. Is that so?
ANITA KUMAR: Yes, the
investigation is actually into
the five. They have looked at
the last
five secretaries of state and
their aides, if they want to get
those -- they're allowed
to look at the aides.
Their jurisdiction is to look at
the aides, so they are looking
at that, but she has said,
I have turned over more
information than anyone else.
She also was the last sitting
secretary
of state and probably had
more e-mail than anyone.
GWEN IFILL: And probably the
only one actually running for
president.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: So let's talk about
what we think or what she has
said is on this thumb drive
in these classified server -- or
-- not a classified server --
private server that she
turned over today. What do we
think it -- what does she say is
in it?
ANITA KUMAR: Well, she says --
so she had 60,000 e-mails on the
server. It was everything
that she e-mailed, personal and
work e-mail while she was
secretary of state for four
years.
She turned 30,000 over to the
State Department, and the others
she said were personal and
she wiped it clean. So it's
really unclear what's on the
server now. I have talked to
experts who say you can get rid
of everything on a server, and I
have talked to experts
who say, unless you really know
what you're doing, you're not
getting rid of everything.
GWEN IFILL: So when you say
wiped clean, that's not just
simply deleting it for storage
reasons?
ANITA KUMAR: If you delete for
storage, it's still there
somewhere. You have to use the
appropriate tools. And these are
technology experts who say it
depends really on the tools
she used.
If someone is in this field and
knows what they're doing, they
might be wiped clean.
GWEN IFILL: And you mentioned
Clinton's aides. They are being
investigated on this front
as well?
ANITA KUMAR: They are. The State
Department inspector general
told us this week that they're
looking into some of her top
aides who did use personal
e-mail for work as well. At
least
one aide also had an account on
her -- on Clinton's private
server.
GWEN IFILL: One of the things
that Secretary Clinton has said
is that she didn't use -- send
anything to her home server that
was classified at the time.
ANITA KUMAR: Right.
GWEN IFILL: What does that
distinction mean, the difference
between what's classified,
what is sensitive and what may
have been just purely personal?
Is there a distinction? And
can you reclassify things?
(CROSSTALK)
ANITA KUMAR: You can classify
later. And that's basically
what's happening.
There were no markings that said
this was -- something was
classified. And that's really
what she's relying on. And her
language is very clear. And she
talks about the markings.
There were no markings, she
says. But what is happening now
is that since the State
Department
is looking through them, they're
releasing them to the public,
part of a lawsuit that
says they have to release State
Department e-mails, they're
looking through and they're
redacting things that
need to be redacted.
Now, some of it is personal.
They're not listing someone's
e-mail address. It's other
things.
This doesn't mean it's
classified or top secret. But
the inspector general for the
intelligence
community has started to look at
these e-mails. And that's where
these five e-mails come in
that he says are classified, not
that they were at the time, but
they should be classified.
GWEN IFILL: It is easy to
confuse, especially when the
person is running for president,
a legal dilemma with a political
dilemma. How is this being
treated by all the parties,
as a legal question or is
it a mix of all of it?
ANITA KUMAR: Isn't
everything political?
GWEN IFILL: Yes, I suppose.
ANITA KUMAR: There are legal
questions, there's no doubt
about it.
But the FBI, which is looking
into the matter, the inspector
generals of two agencies that
are looking into it have been
very clear that what they're
doing is not a criminal
investigation
at this time. That doesn't mean
it wouldn't be at some point. It
could be. We will see
what happens, but they are
pretty -- they are very adamant
she is not the target of
a criminal probe right
now. So that could change.
I think it's really politics
now. I'm not saying that no one
did anything wrong, but
the ramifications for her...
GWEN IFILL: The reason
why it doesn't go away.
ANITA KUMAR: Yes -- is politics.
GWEN IFILL: But there is also a
House investigation that is
still outstanding.
ANITA KUMAR: Yes, there is a
House investigation, and she's
going to testify October 22, so
that will be a big deal.
And the other thing that keeps
coming up is, the State
Department is releasing the
e-mails.
They have to by -- as part of a
lawsuit. So at the end of every
month -- and we will see
this at the end of August -- we
will see more e-mails. And every
time a new batch comes
out, there is all sorts of
new stories to talk about.
GWEN IFILL: We know who
will be reading them all.
Anita Kumar from McClatchy
Newspapers, thank you very much.
ANITA KUMAR: Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: World stock and
currency markets were rocked for
a second straight day today,
as China continued to devalue
its currency, the yuan.
While the drop is not expected
to have a big affect on most
Americans, and the tumult on
Wall Street had calmed by day's
end, some analysts are saying
that for U.S. companies
who are doing a lot of business
inside China, among them Apple,
Coca-Cola, and fast food
retailer Yum! Brands, the change
could hurt sales and trim
profits.
For more on China's move and its
ripple effects, we turn to Eswar
Prasad, professor of trade
policy at Cornell University,
and Mike McDonough. He's chief
global economist at Bloomberg
Intelligence.
Welcome to you both.
Eswar Prasad, to you first. What
does it say that the Chinese
Central Bank for the second
day in a row has decided to let
its currency be decided by
market forces?
ESWAR PRASAD, Professor of Trade
Policy, Cornell University:
Well, China is doing exactly
what
it said it would do, which is to
let the currency's value be
determined by the market, and
the
market wants to push the yuan a
little lower because China's
economy isn't doing so well.
But there is also a good side to
it, because China has been
trying to open up its capital
account, that is, make it easier
for money to flow in and out of
China. And for good
reasons, for diversification and
so forth, a lot of money had
been going out of China
because households and
corporations want to invest
abroad.
Now, the difficulty is that
China is undertaking this move
at a time when it's good for
China,
but not necessarily for the rest
of the world. So, the Chinese
economy has been weak. The
Central Bank has been trying to
do everything it can to prop up
the economy, through interest
rate cuts, reducing the amount
of reserves that Chinese banks
have to keep with the Central
Bank, so that there can be more
credit flowing to the economy.
Nothing has worked that well.
So, now they're turning to the
currency as an added boost.
This may be good for China, but
it is going to be complicated
for the rest of the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mike
McDonough, are we better able to
today to tell whether this
is driven by true -- a desire
for reform, to let these
currency rates be determined
by market forces, or is it all
about boosting China's lagging
growth rate?
MIKE MCDONOUGH, Bloomberg
Intelligence: Well, I think
Eswar hit the nail on the head,
where
the timing is perfect.
It's about the reform, but it's
also about the devaluation that
you saw. Basically, China
took a measure that is certainly
going to help bolster their
export sector, but then
they put this caveat on the end
saying, going forward, we're
going to let the market set
the rate.
So, if you were a policy-maker,
you got exactly what you want.
But the problem is, by doing
this sudden devaluation, they
did lose a bit of credibility.
So there's talk about the
yuan being an SDR, the IMF
recognizing it as a sort of
global currency.
They really hurt their
credibility by doing this sudden
devaluation, this one-off 2
percent.
So, what they need to do now is
prove, follow through, continue
letting the market set the
yuan. And what you're seeing and
why you're seeing so much
turbulence in the market is
because, because they did the 2
percent, they lost the
credibility.
People are scared now. People
are concerned that if China
continues slowing down, they're
going to do another one-off
devaluation, and that's a big
risk. They need to now follow
through. There is an execution
risk. They need to follow
through with what they said.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Eswar, I know
that there are implications
globally for this, but let's
try to focus on the United
States right now. We mentioned
U.S. companies that are deeply
invested in China. Where do they
stand to come out of this, or is
it just too early
to know yet?
ESWAR PRASAD: So far, the
depreciation of the yuan has
been relatively modest.
And, remember, the U.S. dollar
has been very, very strong over
the last year. It's appreciated
by about 20 percent relative to
currencies like the euro and the
yen. There is only one
major currency against which it
is appreciated by this 2 percent
before this devaluation,
and that's the Chinese yuan.
So this is just adjusting for
that a little bit. But for the
U.S., it is going to be in
a slightly uncomfortable if the
yuan and every other major
currency is on the other side
trying to weaken their currency
relative to the dollar.
Now, for companies that are in
the U.S., but are operating in
China, it's a double blow.
First of all, this signals that
the Chinese economy is going to
remain weak. And the government
in China is certainly very
concerned about the weakness in
the economy, so that's going
to affect earnings of a
company like Apple in China.
But, in addition, a lot of the
foreign earnings in China and
elsewhere are going to be
affected
when that money comes back to
the U.S., because the U.S.
dollar is stronger and China's
move
is certainly going to keep the
dollar even stronger than it
would otherwise be. And that
will is going to earnings in
dollars, so it could potentially
be a double blow for companies
like Apple operating in China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mike McDonough,
what would you add to that? What
do you see as the effect
in the U.S.?
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
MIKE MCDONOUGH: What you really
need to look at isn't the
devaluation. It was relatively
minor.
The problem is, why did they do
it? China's economy is hurting.
It is slowing down. They're
doing everything they can to --
in a best-case scenario, in my
view, China, they don't have
a resurgence in growth.
They stabilize growth.
So you have the world's second
largest economy, which has been
this big tailwind for global
growth, not just in the U.S.,
but everywhere -- they're a big
consumer of our exports --
suddenly
sputtering. So this tailwind is
becoming a headwind. That's the
real concern. It's not
the devaluation. It's,
why did they do it?
China's economy is slowing.
Demand is slowing for goods in
general, and that's the real
problem. They need to
basically buoy growth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Eswar, as
you're saying, that has real
effects on countries around
the globe and including in the
U.S., I mean, these companies
that we mentioned and others.
I think some American consumers
may also be asking, is this
going to affect me?
ESWAR PRASAD: For the American
consumers, it could be a mixed
blessing, because if China's
currency continues to weaken and
if other currencies around the
world try to weaken
themselves even more in order to
compete more effectively with
China, that's going to mean
a stronger dollar.
And a stronger dollar means a
couple of good things for U.S.
consumers. Number one, it
means cheaper imports from the
rest of the world. And, second,
it also means lower interest
rates, because even if the Fed
were to hike short-term policy
interest rates sometimes
later this year, long-term rates
in the U.S. are likely to remain
low.
And long-term rates are what
determine mortgage rates, auto
loan rates and so on. So that's
all good for U.S. consumers. But
there are some sectors of the
economy that are very
export-oriented that are going
to get hurt, because, first of
all, foreign companies are
going to be much more
competitive here and Americans
are going to find it much harder
to export to the
rest of the world.
So the benefits are going to be
widespread, but the pain is
going to be concentrated in
some sectors that could face
fairly significant job losses
and the loss of economic
momentum.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mike McDonough,
just quickly, so, what do you
suspect now? What are you
looking for now as we watch
what China is doing?
MIKE MCDONOUGH: You know, I
think, you know, China is going
to have to continue implementing
a bit more stimulus. I think
they have the firepower to at
least stabilize growth that
you have seen in China, but I
think you're not going to see
the China of the past.
China is going to continue to
slow. They're going to try to
stabilize that slowdown. They're
going to continue trying to
reform their economy. And
they're going to continue
opening up,
but it is going to be these
basically short cycles where
everyone gets really euphoric
about China because they think
things are looking better, and
then they're going to
implement some reforms, there
will be some signs that things
are sputtering again, and
then there will be these
concerns about the hard landing.
Right now, we're in one of these
down periods, but eventually
things will stabilize. But
it's going to, going forward, be
this panic and euphoria very
short period phases going
on in China.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They have
certainly gotten everybody's
attention for the last two days.
MIKE MCDONOUGH: Definitely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mike McDonough
with Bloomberg, Eswar Prasad at
Cornell University, we thank
you both.
MIKE MCDONOUGH: Thank you.
ESWAR PRASAD: Thank you.
MIKE MCDONOUGH: Thank
you very much.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": why
a major opponent of the Iran
nuclear deal changed his mind;
unleashing musical gifts early
in life; and the rise of heroin
in the heartland of small-town
America.
But, first, tonight, we launch a
series of conversations on the
pros and cons of the
contentious debate over the
nuclear agreement with Iran,
which Congress has 36 more days
to review, Deal or No Deal.
Tonight, Hari Sreenivasan talks
to a well-respected nuclear
expert who just resigned as
president
of a group which
publicly opposes it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gary Samore
helped establish the advocacy
group United Against a Nuclear
Iran in 2008, before serious
negotiations had begun over
Iran's nuclear program. The
goal? Strengthen sanctions
against Tehran in the face of
what Samore and others believed
was a clandestine
nuclear program.
From 2009 to 2013, Samore served
as President Obama's White House
coordinator for arms control
and weapons of mass destruction,
while serious talks between the
so-called P5-plus-one and
Iran were under way.
After leaving the White House,
Samore went to the Belfer Center
for Science and International
Affairs at Harvard's Kennedy
School of Government. When the
nuclear deal was signed with
Iran
last month, there was
near-unanimous opposition to the
pact from Samore's fellow
members of
the anti-Iran-nuclear advocacy
group. It is resuming a
multimillion-dollar advertising
campaign denouncing the deal.
But Samore's judgment was
different. He was satisfied with
the Iran agreement, and he
has now stepped down as
the group's president.
On Monday, former Connecticut
Democratic and independent
Senator Joseph Lieberman, a
decided
opponent of the Iran deal, was
named as the chairman of United
Against a Nuclear Iran
organization.
And Gary Samore joins me now.
So, you worked with an
organization. At least for the
past two years, you helped lead
an
organization that's core mission
was to prevent Iran from getting
nuclear weapons. What made
you want to step down?
GARY SAMORE, Former Presidential
Adviser on Arms Control: Well,
as you said, I disagreed
with the organization on whether
or not to support the agreement.
In my judgment, this agreement
is the best available option to
prevent Iran from acquiring
nuclear weapons. Others in the
group came to a different
conclusion. I respect that,
but under the circumstances, I
didn't feel I could continue to
be president of the organization
at the same time that they were
mounting a campaign to encourage
Congress to reject the
agreement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, are they
wrong in doing that? They seem
to be doubling down on this
campaign to try to convince and
the U.S. public that this is a
bad deal.
GARY SAMORE: Well, I can
understand their views.
I think there are elements of
this agreement that I'm not
comfortable with. I think it
leaves Iran with a larger
enrichment program than I would
prefer and I think the duration
of the agreement isn't as long
as I would like. But, on the
other hand, I think the
agreement has some
positive elements.
It constrains Iran's ability to
produce fissile material for
nuclear weapons at its declared
facilities for at least 15
years. And it establishes a
verification and enforcement
mechanism that
I think will improve our ability
to catch Iran cheating and our
ability to reimpose
sanctions.
So, on balance, I think the
advantages outweigh the
disadvantages. And I'm skeptical
we can
negotiate a significantly better
deal within a short period of
time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk
about some of those concerns.
You have actually expressed
this in writings and
speeches and elsewhere.
One of the concerns you had was
that Iran, even in a recent
paper that you published
at the Belfer Center, is that
this might increase Iran's
ability to create nuclear
weapons in
a covert manner. While there
might be opportunities for us to
catch that, it doesn't prevent
it.
GARY SAMORE: Well, I think you
have to recognize that any
inspection mechanism will have
strengths
and weaknesses.
The system that the agreement
puts in place will improve our
ability to catch Iran if
they try to build secret
facilities to process nuclear
material, like a covert
enrichment
plant. We already have good
capability through national
intelligence and by working with
our allies and their national
intelligence agencies, but the
agreement, I think, will
amplify our national
intelligence.
In other areas, like
weaponization research, it's
very difficult for either
national intelligence
or an inspection system to
really have confidence in
catching and detecting that kind
of activity.
So, on balance, I think you have
to say that the agreement
strengthens our ability to deal
with any effort by Iran to build
a covert nuclear processing
facility, but probably
is not going to be able to catch
them if they do small-scale
weapons research.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about the
time limits? You have said you
were a little uncomfortable.
You said you wished it was
longer. But in these 10 to 15
years, do we clamp down enough
on their ability
to enrich uranium?
GARY SAMORE: I think, for 15
years, the limits on enrichment
and the limits on their efforts
to construct any capability to
produce plutonium are very solid
at the declared facilities.
So Iran really won't have an
option to produce fissile
material for nuclear weapons for
at
least 15 years. Even at year 15,
when the physical limits are
lifted, it would still
take Iran a couple of more years
to expand its program and have a
credible capacity.
The gamble, of course, is that
we just don't have any way of
predicting, in 15 years, what
kind of government in Iran
we're going to be facing.
And the concern is that we may
still have a government in
Tehran in 15 years that has
ambitions to develop nuclear
weapons, and the question will
be whether -- whoever is
president at that time, whether
they're going to be able to
reassemble international
pressure
if Iran has actually complied
with this agreement for 15
years.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
through-lines from critics is,
was there a better deal to
be had? Was the extension of
sanctions, perhaps, over a
longer period of time, would
that have
forced Iran to the table in
less of a strong position?
GARY SAMORE: You know, it's very
difficult to replay history, and
unless you're actually
sitting in the negotiating room,
I think it's very hard to make a
judgment about whether
a better deal, significantly
better deal could have been
negotiated. So I'm not really
able
to make that judgment.
The question, I think, is this
deal compared to a better deal
if we reject it and try to
renegotiate? And I think, in the
near term, it's unlikely that we
could negotiate a deal
that would be significantly
better. My judgment at the end
of the day is that it's better
to have a bird in hand than two
in the bush, and I think this
deal is good enough so that
we should support it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gary Samore,
thanks so much for joining us.
GARY SAMORE: Thank you, Hari.
On our next Deal or No Deal
segment, we will hear from an
opponent of the Iran nuclear
agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: If you take
a look at musical orchestras
across the country, you
will find a striking lack of
black and Latino players. For
more than 30 years, Project
STEP,
based just beneath the Symphony
Hall stage in Boston, has been
trying to change that.
Now its mentoring program for
young musicians is even getting
attention from the White House.
Jared Bowen of PBS station
MD-BöWGBH in Boston has the
story.
JARED BOWEN, WGBH: They have all
the bearings of the classically
trained and the classically
gifted, years of study at play,
despite their few years. And
they are, in many respects,
the unlikely.
MARY JAFFEE, Executive Director,
Project STEP: Some kids are born
with a musicality that
really shows through at age 5.
You can see it in the way that
they move to music. You
can see it in the way
they follow rhythms.
MAN: One, two, three, four.
JARED BOWEN: Mary Jaffee is the
executive director of Project
STEP, a Boston organization
that teases talent out of kids
who might otherwise find it
squandered. Her mission is
simple:
to change the face
of classical music.
MARY JAFFEE: There are so few --
in fact, virtually -- almost no
African-American and
Latino musicians in
orchestras and in audiences.
JARED BOWEN: Since 1982, Project
STEP has pushed to correct that
imbalance. Each year,
it fans out across Boston
kindergarten classes,
identifying students with
unusual potential.
MARY JAFFEE: From that 50 to 100
kids, we take in three to four a
year, so it's a very
narrow bottleneck. Those
kids are highly talented.
MAN: So, the trick is to play
them all in the right time.
JARED BOWEN: These young
children are among the finalists
for acceptance into Project
STEP. If chosen, they will be
plunged into an intensive music
immersion program.
From now until they graduate
high school, they will take
weekly classes, receive
one-on-one
lessons and they're expected to
complete hours of at-home
practice. And that's all on top
of their regular schoolwork. At
this last stage of selection,
the students are divided
into small groups for a month of
violin lessons perfecting how
they hold their bow, position
their feet and read music.
Susan Jarvis has been teaching
the class for 13 years,
scrutinizing their mastery of
music.
SUSAN JARVIS, Teacher, Project
STEP: It's a matter of finding
which child -- which children
can adapt to it the fastest.
Every child can do it in their
own time, but some kids are
maybe a little more innately
coordinated or have a really
strong interest in it.
Hands up if you know
where A-string is.
JARED BOWEN: They are so young.
SUSAN JARVIS: These
guys are old.
(LAUGHTER)
SUSAN JARVIS: These are a joy to
teach every year, because
they're 5 and 6 years old. And
that's a big difference from the
3- and 4-year-olds, which I -- I
normally teach.
JARED BOWEN: Just as important
as the music is what happens at
home. Project STEP will
select only students who have
full parental involvement. In
class, they are fully behind
the students.
SUSAN JARVIS: Let's get some
help from your parents. They're
going to be your beat partners.
They're going to keep your eyes
on the music, and you're going
to keep your eyes on their
fingers.
The parents are the lifeline. We
work pretty hard to tell the
parents what to do, how to
do it, and how many times to do
it, because in teaching a string
instrument, there's just
not a lot of room for
error at the beginning.
AJANI BOYD, Student, Project
STEP: Personally, music just
calms me down. Like, it makes me
feel good inside.
JARED BOWEN: At 11 years old,
Ajani Boyd has now played with
Project STEP longer than he
hasn't. He's all about the bass
now, but he was 4 when he chose
the cello.
AJANI BOYD: I picked the cello.
And, honestly, I kind of picked
the cello because I could
sit down.
JARED BOWEN: He can be forgiven
the easy choice, given the
program's demands, practice
daily
and up to nine hours
every Saturday.
MARY JAFFEE: It's pretty
intense. The new measure of
10,000 hours of preparation,
rehearsal,
practice, whatever it is, they
put it in by the time they're in
high school. It's an -- it's
just an awful lot.
JARED BOWEN: But it served Njeri
Grevious well. She's now a
sophomore at Yale University
studying mathematics.
Do you think about what would
have been if you didn't have an
opportunity like this?
NJERI GREVIOUS, Yale University:
Very difficult, almost
impossible. I actually don't
want to
think about that. I definitely
think it's -- I have been so
blessed.
JARED BOWEN: Grevious spent 12
years in Project STEP, including
a time, she says, when her
family was left homeless.
NJERI GREVIOUS: When we were
living out of the car, when
sometimes it was very, very
cold waking up in the morning,
no heating in the house, and
trying to practice, we pull
-- were able to put all that
aside, because, when we're
engaging with our instruments,
its just us, ourselves, our
instruments, our music.
And then when we're playing with
other people, it's all of that
times -- to the nth power.
And we're able to find
peace and solace.
JARED BOWEN: Working off a tight
budget with money it receives
from foundations and individual
donors, Project STEP subsidizes
virtually all the students'
expenses, roughly $9,000
to $11,000 annually.
It gives them opportunity, while
their base in the basement of
Symphony Hall gives them
access.
MARY JAFFEE: One parent put it
that she didn't think she could
touch Symphony Hall. She used
to walk by it and thought it
just wasn't for her. And now
she's learned to navigate the
halls and say hello to
some of the musicians.
JARED BOWEN: And even play with
them. There are not many people,
let alone 11-year-olds,
who can claim to have performed
on stage with one of the most
famous musicians of our time.
NJERI GREVIOUS: Here is Yo-Yo
Ma, and then a little bit next
to him is me.
(LAUGHTER)
NJERI GREVIOUS: That was an
incredible opportunity that I
got, and I will never forget
that moment.
JARED BOWEN: The moments don't
get much bigger, though, than
when Project STEP was honored
by the White House late last
year with a National Arts and
Humanities Youth Program Award,
presented
by first lady Michelle Obama.
AJANI BOYD: It's just crazy to
be able to say, "when I came
back from the White House."
I mean, it's -- being -- going
to the White House was amazing.
It was such a fun experience.
Met a lot of people. I got to
meet the first lady. So it was
just awesome in all.
JARED BOWEN: All of this is a
testament to the music and the
instruction, that in an
age of attention deficits, these
students will practice thousands
of hours. In moments
of crisis, music is
their salvation.
All of Project STEP's 60
students have graduated high
school, and half of them have
gone on
to the country's most
prestigious Ivy League schools
or conservatories. And Jaffee
says
more than half of them are now
professional musicians
themselves.
Does the program change lives?
MARY JAFFEE: It does change
lives. I believe it does change
lives. It's certainly changed
my life.
JARED BOWEN: And many others
through the power of music.
This is Jared Bowen from WGBH
for the "PBS NewsHour" in
Boston.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back with
a look at the American heroin
epidemic.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your local PBS
station. You can have the
opportunity
to offer your support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
Now the latest addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
According to the Centers for
Disease Control, heroin usage in
the U.S. has doubled among
young adults in the last decade
and deaths have quadrupled.
Former Los Angeles Times
reporter Sam Quinones looks at
what's driving that surge in his
new book, "Dreamland: The True
Tale of America's Opiate
Epidemic."
He recently talked with Jeffrey
Brown and painted a graphic
portrait of a national problem.
SAM QUINONES, Author,
"Dreamland: The True Tale of
America's Opiate Epidemic": This
is
the quietest epidemic, drug
epidemic or drug scourge, we
have ever had in this country,
certainly in the
last 50, 60 years.
No public violence is
associated, not like crack,
where the people were battling
for
street corners and this kind of
thing. People are dying alone in
their bedrooms, in a McDonald's
bathroom. And there's no
publicity. Families are
stigmatized, horribly mortified
that their
kids are addicted and then that
their kids die of this stuff.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this came
from reporting on the drug trade
in Mexico and the U.S. What
grabbed your attention?
SAM QUINONES: Well, I discovered
in the course of my reporting
the story of one small town
in Mexico on the Pacific Coast,
where everybody in that town had
migrated to the United States,
had developed a system
for selling heroin.
They were master heroin
retailers in the United States,
selling heroin like pizza, like
delivery
model. And they had used this
system to, first of all, employ
hundreds of people in the town
and spread across the country,
so they were in like half the
country.
What I also came to understand,
though, was that they had this
enormous market for heroin.
This one small town became one
of the major suppliers of heroin
to the United States.
That market was due entirely to
a whole new supply of addicts
who got addicted to prescription
painkillers.
JEFFREY BROWN: So it's actually
a tale of two kinds of drugs,
right, two opiates.
SAM QUINONES: Two opiates.
JEFFREY BROWN: One is legal in
the U.S., prescription drugs for
pain.
SAM QUINONES: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then there's
this heroin market on top of
that.
Somehow, they're linked.
SAM QUINONES: Yes. And what
connects them is that this is a
new kind of drug trafficking
in a sense. It's all based
on branding and marketing.
It's no longer based on the old
style of gunplay and shoot-outs
for street corners and all
that kind of scuff.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's not the
cartels that we have been
hearing, where all the violence
is.
SAM QUINONES: Exactly. These are
the anti-cartels, the
anti-"Scarface," you might say.
These
guys are all about low profile.
They're all about branding their
drugs, making sure that
you know, every time you buy a
little 10th-of-a-gram balloon of
heroin from them, that you know
exactly what's in it, that you
can call if it's no good and
have it replaced.
At the same time, though, the
companies that promoted the
pills have also used branding
and marketing to convince
doctors all across America that
these pills can be used without
risk, without risk of addiction,
virtually nonaddictive when used
to address...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that is
where the story starts in the
U.S., right, is the rise of
these kinds of pills that many
people are familiar with,
whether you're an athlete or
any -- all kinds
of people, right?
SAM QUINONES: Sure. Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pain, you get
prescribed these kinds of pills.
And you were told that they
were nonaddictive, or
mostly not addictive.
SAM QUINONES: You were told they
were nonaddictive, or you
weren't told anything. You were
just
given a big whack of pills. I
had my appendix out, they gave
me 60 Vicodin to take home.
The message in that bottle was,
doesn't matter how many of these
you take. It's not going
to addict you.
You're not -- they didn't tell
me anything about what was in
them. I think is kind of
common practice all across the
country because of this pain
revolution that took place in
the '80s and well into the '90s,
gaining a lot of momentum then.
JEFFREY BROWN: Much of it to
benefit to people, right?
SAM QUINONES: Of course. No,
these are legitimate pills, and
many people use them to great
benefit.
And it has assuaged the pain of
many, many people, chronic pain,
as well as post-surgical
pain.
The problem is, there is not a
lot of attempt to just determine
who should be taking them,
how many pills they should take
home with them. And there is not
a lot of time spent
by doctors on dealing with maybe
a patient's history of
addiction, say, in the past,
what
-- do you have any addiction,
history of alcoholism?
JEFFREY BROWN: And what's been
the result? This is -- you
describe it, throughout Middle
America especially.
SAM QUINONES: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: An epidemic?
What do you see?
SAM QUINONES: I see epidemic.
I see a scourge that has
attacked communities that are
completely unprepared for this.
They
have never seen anything like
it. It's families who never
really had this kind of
addiction
to hard drugs ever in their
lives. It's hitting rural areas.
It's hitting suburban areas.
Athletes -- it now seems to me,
frankly, that at times football
is almost a gateway to heroin
addiction, because so many
football players are treated for
their chronic pain with these
pills. They then get addicted
and eventually -- if it's not
treated, eventually, you have
to transition to heroin
after using these pills.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what kind of
awareness is there now, either
in the medical community,
in government? What
is or could be done?
SAM QUINONES: I think what needs
to be happen is very much what
began happening with the AIDS
epidemic, and
that is a recognition and
talking a lot about it, removing
that stigma.
Once you remove it, then people
who get -- who are new to it can
figure out what their kids
need. But that's what has not
happened. That's why I think it
has spread.
JEFFREY BROWN: All
right, the book
is "Dreamland."
Sam Quinones, thank you so much.
SAM QUINONES: My
pleasure. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Almost everyone makes
one big mistake when negotiating
a higher salary, says jobs guru
Nick Corcodilos. But there's a
surefire way to elegantly open
that conversation
with potential employers. If you
want more money, you have to
prove why you're worth more, he
says.
On our Making Sense page, he
explains just how to do that.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Have you read it?
GWEN IFILL: I think I know I
have made that big -- one
mistake, and I'm looking for
the elegant solution, so
I will be logging on.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: That's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday: an inside
look at the fight to
take down the Islamic
State in Syria.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.